--- 
layout: chapter
author: Bryan Sivak
title: The Promise and Pitfalls of Open Data 
chapter: 1
---

*What follows is excerpted from a conversation with Bryan Sivak, edited
for clarity and brevity.*

In 1997, I graduated from college and got a job working for IBM doing
natural language processing. Just like pretty much everybody else at the
time, I was caught up in the startup craze. One day, a couple buddies of
mine and I decided to found a company. It started off as a web based
natural language search engine. We made a little bit of money and—before
these things were even called pivots—we pivoted into an enterprise
solution that we sold to some big financial institutions to use on their
websites. We continued with that trajectory and in 2005, I moved over to
London to open up the European and Asian offices for the company.

Then out of the blue in 2009, I got a phone call from the City of
Washington D.C. asking me if I would be interested in talking to them
about being their CIO/CPO. I always had a thing for public service—I
thought it was an important way of making a difference in the world. One
thing led to another, and I ended up taking the job. I was there for
about eighteen months in D.C., until the mayor who hired me lost his
re-election campaign. The new guy came in and, as many of them do,
cleaned house of all the previous administration’s appointees.

I was gainfully unemployed for a few months and enjoying every minute of
it. Then I was introduced to the governor of Maryland [Governor Martin
O’Malley]. I got to know the governor quite well who’s a remarkable guy.
We started talking and ended up essentially inventing a job: Chief
Innovation Officer for the State of Maryland.

I had a plan. I’m really bad at making plans; they never seem to work
out quite the way that I planned them to. My plan was to work for the
governor through the end of his term, which ended the next year, and
then go back to the private sector—probably in software entrepreneurship
again.

And then Todd [Park] moved to the White House from HHS [Health and Human
Services]. I was excited because I wanted to talk to him about Maryland
collaborating with the White House to do some experiments with data. I
called him up and asked him if he wanted to grab a coffee.

About half way through that conversation, he turned to me and said he
wanted me to do his old job.

“Wait a minute,” I thought. “That is not how this conversation was
supposed to go at all.”

I had two rules for myself: the Maryland CIO job was my last public
sector job for a while, and I would never ever under any circumstances
go work for the federal government. But with Todd being Todd, and
healthcare in this country being what it is, I really had no choice but
to take this.

It was also partly due to the fact that my dad’s a doctor, his dad’s a
doctor, and his cousins and uncles were doctors. I was probably almost a
doctor in some way. I’ve always been interested in healthcare. Then when
you look at the problem with healthcare in this country—not only the
fact that it’s literally the single largest problem the US has in terms
of our economic advancement, but also as an obstacle to maximizing the
wellbeing of the people of the country—how could you not do it? This
moment is ripe for change enabled by both technology and the recognition
that processes and culture need to change in the space. It is massively
important.

Think about this: healthcare in this country is a \$2.8 trillion
industry right now. It’s eighteen percent of our GDP. We spend the most
per capita by far on healthcare. In fact, we spend more than the next
ten countries combined per capita and our system is ranked only 37th out
of 191 healthcare systems worldwide (Murray & Frank, 2010).

To me, what that signals is massive opportunity. I didn’t know exactly
what that massive opportunity meant until I started working here and
learning about this system. It turns out that there are a few things
that need to change, such as the fundamentally flawed way that we pay
for healthcare in this country. We incentivize transactions as opposed
to incentivizing outcomes, which means we spend more money on tests and
treatments instead of focusing on keeping people out of the hospital in
the first place. We recognize that this is the problem. The question is,
how do you solve it?

It turns out that in order to really elucidate and begin addressing the
problems within the system, you need data—data about payments, about
individual patient records, about providers. If you can bring this all
together in an open way (while still preserving privacy), you’ve got the
potential for payment reform powered by data, care reform powered by
data, and incentives in place to further inoperability of these systems
to actually share data in better ways. This is what we have begun to do
at HHS. The right data can go a long way towards reforming a legacy
institutional system like healthcare.

Of course, the characteristics of these systems—and how data can most
effectively be used within them—vary greatly between local, state, and
federal government. Cities are like the two-seater sports cars of
government: they’re relatively agile and they can implement things
relatively quickly. You never know what the next day is going to bring.
You can make a decision to implement something and literally see the
fruits of your labor a day later. It’s actually pretty amazing. When I
was talking to Governor O’Malley in Maryland—he was mayor of Baltimore
before he became the state governor—he used to joke around that he had
been “demoted” to governor because being mayor is very operational.
You’re making decisions that affect the way the people live. You’re
doing the stuff that people see on a daily basis.

On the state level, states are actually this comfortable relative slow
ride, like a station wagon. It’ll get you from point A to point B, no
problem. It’s pretty comfortable and probably not going to have any
accidents, but it’s not going to get you there quick. The state
government is interesting a lot of what they do is pushing money around
to companies and cities to actually implement the policies that they’re
trying to get implemented. It doesn’t necessarily move as fast as local
government. A lot of state capitals are relatively quiet towns and I
think some of that attitude and the environment rubs off on the
institution itself. It’s middle ground.

The federal government, at least from my relatively limited perspective,
is like the fully loaded high performance Cadillac: it moves fast,
there’s a ton of stuff going on, and there’s millions of people who work
here. There are many external influences. You’ve got a million different
things going on that you’re trying to figure out how to do, and you’re
dealing with massive geographic areas, so there’s a lot of diversity to
take into account. There’s a lot more bureaucracy, a lot more oversight
in some ways. At the same time, we also don’t do anything very granular
here. We pay for a lot of programs, but unlike at the local level, there
are a very few things that we actually do that are specifically tangible
to individuals of the country. Things like Medicare, which actually does
touch a significant portion of this country, are an exception to that.
Other than that, we aren’t doing much that really effects people on a
day-to-day basis.

When you’re talking about cities, the most important data that you’re
going to be able to utilize will be data that helps you operate more
effectively and efficiently. Any statistics or data that you can collect
deals with the operational aspects of how the government works and
citizens interact with it is going to be vitally important: trash
getting picked up, crime, potholes, transit, how many people come
through your parks and rec facilities and how often the grass gets
mowed.

The open data community likes to focus on getting data out there so
people can do things with the data. I actually like to think of it first
from the perspective of what the government can do with the data to make
their operations more effective and efficient. If the institution starts
using information to make itself better, then it’s almost an inevitable
side effect that the data will be released because the utility of that
information will be obvious. We need to ask ourselves what’s in it for
us; then we can make the case much more easily about why it should be
open.

This makes a lot of sense on the local level. As you get to the broader
levels of government there’s less operation that you would use data to
manage, but there are lots of ways that we can use data to manage
programs more effectively. We haven’t done a lot of outcome-based
management at the state and federal level, but that’s changing. There
are many people here who really believe in outcome-based management and
data-driven decisions, and in order to do that, you need the data. In
these cases the data is more useful internally than it is externally
because it helps shape our policy goals—although you can imagine that
there are plenty of communities out there that would find the same kind
of data interesting and useful because of the policy goals that it could
help shape.

Value is defined differently for anybody. There might be one person out
there who gets an immense amount of value out of a dataset being
released. There might be a thousand people who get a little bit of value
out of another dataset. Which one is more valuable? This is a question
that we are still struggling with in lots of ways. We released a dataset
on hospital billing that could prove to be very valuable—not necessarily
because of the data it contains but because of the discussions it
sparks. The data itself is not actually all that surprising to people
who know about how healthcare works. Did the fact that this dataset is
now public change the perspective of hospitals to the extent that they
might decide that they want to do things differently? If that happens,
that might be the most valuable data release we’ve ever done.

Within HHS, we have over thousand datasets that we’ve been able to
catalog, and over four hundred of them released on healthcare.gov or
healthdata.gov. There are many datasets in there that are somewhat
useful. Then there are a few that are very useful. For example, the
National Plan and Provider Enumeration System is basically a big list of
almost all the doctors in the country, where they’re located, and what
their specialties are. That’s a pretty useful dataset if you want to
build an application that involves the patient and healthcare.

An individual named Fred Trotter did something really interesting. It
turns out that in the Medicare claims data file, for every referral
there are two associated numbers listed. One is the identifier for the
referring doctor and one is the identifier for the doctor that was
referred to. Fred Trotter had the idea that if he could get those
associated identifier numbers, he could start to build the social graph
of doctors and better understand the flow of referrals.

He tried to get this data through normal channels and couldn’t do it, so
he ended up filing a FOIA request. We hadn’t initially made that data
open, but as a result of that FOIA request we just published the data on
the website. It’s a subset of the Medicare claim standard set that we
could publish because there’s no identifying information in there. It’s
something that could have some massive impact if it’s thought about or
utilized in the right way.

There’s so many different meanings that the word “value” contains. Back
in D.C. when we were doing this on a local level, the highest value
dataset was probably crimes statistics: where crimes happened, what
types of crimes they were, what time of day or night they happened. This
was valuable because we used it internally to help put our police in the
right places. And it was also incredibly useful for everyday citizens
who want to know about quality of life and neighborhood safety.

The question of how do you define value is an essential one as we think
about justifying resources for open data. We tend to often link the
value of data to economic development, but I’m actually not a fan of
doing so. It’s still such an emergent movement, and what we don’t want
to do is provide open data opponents inside government or outside
government with ammunition. By basing arguments in favor of open data on
economic development, you open up a line of attack if we don’t see
results soon. It’s really hard, in many cases, to definitively say that
economic development is happening because of data being released.

If you ask anyone for two examples of where open data has driven
economic development, they’ll say GPS or weather data. It’s hard to find
any further solid examples. We’ve heard much of this from the White
House because they have to tie everything back to jobs—that’s what
everybody has cared about for the past three years. If you can link
something back to that, you’re going to get some airtime and your
project will be considered a success.

Is there potential for open data to generate economic benefits?
Absolutely. Do we know where it’s going to come from? I don’t think so.
We have some ideas but I don’t think we really know. There are enough
startups out there that are using government provided data that you can
begin to make the argument, but we’ve yet to see any new slam-dunks like
weather and GPS. This is something that’s going to take a while to
develop. Look how long it took for weather data and GPS data to grow
into blossoming industries.

It’s extremely difficult to predict which datasets, when opened, can
eventually lead to new companies and products. To predicate the
near-term success of your open data program on that concept can lead to
big problems.

A great example of justifying data-driven decision-making for policy
outcomes rather than economic development is Governor O’Malley’s
StateStat program in Maryland. As part of that, he’s developed fifteen
strategic goals for the state. If you look at each one of those fifteen
strategic goals, they’re all based on things that other groups in the
state are implementing—not the state government itself. For example, one
goal is to improve student achievement and career readiness in Maryland
by twenty-five percent by the end of 2015. That’s up to the
universities, the elementary schools, the middle schools, the high
schools, and the preschools.

The genius of Governor O’Malley is that he recognizes that not only do
you need to use data to manage the achievement of certain goals, but
also you need to build that into the culture of the organization. I
helped develop the culture of open data in Maryland state government
when I joined in 2011, and I can tell you what some of the challenges
are in building an open data-friendly institution. While Maryland is a
bit of an outlying case because people there already understand the
value of data because of the existing StateStat initiative, there are
some very standard things that institutions are resistant to regarding
open data.

First of all, people are afraid that data will be taken out of context
or used in a way that doesn’t make sense. That’s a totally fair concern.
Another fear is that data will be used against them in some way by
political interests or outside parties who will take information and
spin it. That’s a legitimate fear as well—it happens. There’s no getting
around it. In many cases it comes down to a fear of loss of control once
the information becomes publicly available. These are really basic
cultural challenges.

I think the technical and economic challenges that are thrown out are
almost red herrings—because all of those things can be solved for if the
desire’s there. I am reminded time and time again that technology is
always the easy part of an open data initiative. It’s rarely—if ever—the
solution. Technology is an enabler or a catalyst or an accelerant, but
the factor that leads to real change is changing institutional culture.

I would argue that within HHS, the fact that we published four hundred
datasets, many with APIs, that some companies and organizations are
using in interesting ways is not what constitutes our success. Our big
success so far is that the general attitude towards opening data is now
“Let me think about how I can do that” rather than “There’s no way
you’re getting that.” We still have a long way to go, but I think that
that’s the critical change that’s happened: changing the culture around
putting information out there.

Some of the smartest people I’ve ever worked with work in government.
When I first got to D.C. in 2009, I remember walking into the building
thinking I’m about to meet all of these “government employees.” I had
this stereotypical viewpoint that everybody would be a clock-punching
bureaucrat who is just riding on a pension. What I discovered—literally
from the first second I started talking to people—was that these people
are incredibly intelligent and they want to do the right thing.
Sometimes they’re just held back from doing the things that they know
are the right things to do by the bureaucratic, risk-averse, and siloed
nature of the organization.

Is there the technical expertise required to take data and use it
internally to manage operations? Absolutely. Will those people’s skills
be used in that way? That’s a different question entirely. That question
is predicated on whether or not the leadership and management of an
organization believe in the importance of data-based management.

From the top down, leadership has to emphasize the importance of data
and information in making decisions and guiding your actions. When
trying new things, we need to try it on a small scale, collect
information about our impact, and iterate rapidly. That needs to become
a basic part of the institutional culture, and it has to start from the
top. You have to set specific goals and commit to measuring these things
on a regular basis to track progress. If I were going to change one
thing about how our major institutions and organizations are run—not
just in the public sector, but private sector too—that would be it.

### About the Author 

Bryan Sivak joined the United States Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) as the Chief Technology Officer in July 2012. In this
role, he is responsible for helping HHS leadership harness the power of
data, technology, and innovation to improve the health and welfare of
the nation.

Previously, Bryan served as the Chief Innovation Officer to Maryland
Governor Martin O’Malley, where he has led Maryland’s efforts to embed
concepts of innovation into the DNA of state government

Prior to his time with Governor O’Malley, Bryan served as Chief
Technology Officer for the District of Columbia, where he created a
technology infrastructure that enhanced communication between the
District’s residents and their government, and implemented
organizational reforms that improved efficiency, program controls, and
customer service. Bryan previously worked in the private sector,
co-founding InQuira, Inc., a multi-national software company, in 2002,
and Electric Knowledge LLC, which provided one of the world’s first
Natural Language Search engines available on the web in 1998.

### References 

Murray, C. J. L., & Frenk, J. (2010). Ranking 37th—Measuring the
Performance of the U.S. Health Care System. The New England Journal of
Medicine, 362, 98-99. Retrieved from
http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp0910064



